Guillain-Barré syndrome, or GBS, is
not a primary lung disease, but it can
quickly become
a respiratory emergency.
The key problem is neuromuscular weakness.
The immune system attacks peripheral
nerves, often after a recent
gastrointestinal or respiratory infection,
and this can cause ascending weakness
that moves from the legs upward.
For respiratory therapists, the concern is
what happens when that
weakness reaches the muscles needed for
breathing, coughing,
swallowing, and airway protection.
The diaphragm, intercostal muscles,
accessory muscles,
and bulbar muscles may all become
involved.
When that happens, the patient may lose
ventilatory strength,
develop a weak cough, retain secretions,
aspirate, or progress toward respiratory
failure.
A major board prep point is this.
Do not rely on oxygen saturation alone.
A patient with GBS may have a normal SpO2
while their respiratory mechanics are
getting worse.
That is why serial monitoring matters.
RTs should trend vital capacity or forced
vital capacity, NIF
or MIP, cough strength, secretion
clearance,
respiratory pattern, fatigue, mental
status,
and ABG or carbon dioxide trends.
Red flags include rapidly falling vital
capacity, a weaker or
less negative NIF, weak cough, pooling
secretions, dysphagia, wet voice,
rising PaCO2, falling pH, autonomic
instability,
exhaustion, or altered mental status.
These findings suggest the patient may be
losing ventilatory reserve or airway protection.
Diagnostics may include lumbar puncture
findings, such as elevated protein
with normal or low cell count, known as
albuminocytologic dissociation,
and nerve conduction studies showing
demyelinating or axonal injury.
But for the RT, the most important bedside
question is
can this patient ventilate, protect the
airway,
and clear secretions?
Treatment may include IVIG or
plasmapheresis to address the immune process,
but these treatments do not immediately
restore respiratory strength.
Supportive respiratory care remains
critical.
RT interventions may include frequent
respiratory mechanics checks, airway clearance,
cough assist, suctioning, positioning,
lung expansion support, ventilator
monitoring, and
early communication with the team when
trends worsen.
If the patient develops rising carbon
dioxide, fatigue,
poor cough, bulbar weakness, or rapidly
declining mechanics, escalation should
happen early.
Waiting for severe desaturation is a
common mistake because oxygenation may stay acceptable until
ventilatory failure is advanced.
The clinical takeaway is simple.
Guillain-Barre syndrome can quietly
progress from limb weakness to respiratory pump failure.
RTs protect these patients by trending
mechanics, recognizing airway protection
problems, supporting secretion clearance,
and escalating
before respiratory collapse occurs.